      Contextual Imagined Goals for Self-Supervised
                   Robotic Learning
                   Ashvin Nair∗         Shikhar Bahl∗ Alexander Khazatsky∗
                   Vitchyr Pong          Glen Berseth     Sergey Levine
                                   University of California, Berkeley




         Abstract: While reinforcement learning provides an appealing formalism for
         learning individual skills, a general-purpose robotic system must be able to mas-
         ter an extensive repertoire of behaviors. Instead of learning a large collection of
         skills individually, can we instead enable a robot to propose and practice its own
         behaviors automatically, learning about the affordances and behaviors that it can
         perform in its environment, such that it can then repurpose this knowledge once
         a new task is commanded by the user? In this paper, we study this question in
         the context of self-supervised goal-conditioned reinforcement learning. A central
         challenge in this learning regime is the problem of goal setting: in order to prac-
         tice useful skills, the robot must be able to autonomously set goals that are feasible
         but diverse. When the robot’s environment and available objects vary, as they do
         in most open-world settings, the robot must propose to itself only those goals that
         it can accomplish in its present setting with the objects that are at hand. Previous
         work only studies self-supervised goal-conditioned RL in a single-environment
         setting, where goal proposals come from the robot’s past experience or a genera-
         tive model are sufficient. In more diverse settings, this frequently leads to impossi-
         ble goals and, as we show experimentally, prevents effective learning. We propose
         a conditional goal-setting model that aims to propose goals that are feasible from
         the robot’s current state. We demonstrate that this enables self-supervised goal-
         conditioned off-policy learning with raw image observations in the real world,
         enabling a robot to manipulate a variety of objects and generalize to new objects
         that were not seen during training.

         Keywords: Robotics, Deep Reinforcement Learning, Self-Supervision

1   Introduction
In order for robots to truly become generalists, they must be readily taskable by humans, handle
raw sensory inputs without instrumentation, and be equipped with a range of skills that generalize
effectively to new situations. Reinforcement learning autonomously learns policies that maximize a
reward function and is a promising approach towards such generalist robots. However, in a general
setting involving diverse objects and tasks, prior information about what tasks to learn is hard to
come by without manually designing object detectors and reward functions. How can a robot explore
the world in order to learn and fine-tune useful skills on diverse objects, only from acting and
observing how its actions affect its sensory stream?
Prior methods have proposed to let an agent learn from its sensor stream by automatically generating
plausible goals during an unsupervised training phase, and then learning policies that reach those
goals [1, 2, 3, 4]. Such goals can be defined in a variety of ways, but a simple choice is to use goal
observations, such that each proposed task requires reaching a different observation. When the robot
observes the world via raw camera images, this corresponds to using images as goals. At test time,
a user then provides the robot with a new goal image.
While such methods have been demonstrated in both simulated and real-world settings, they are
typically used to learn behaviors in domains with relatively little visual diversity. In the real world,
a robot might interact with highly diverse scenes and objects, and the tasks that it can perform from
each of the many possible initial states will be different. If the robot is presented with an object, it

3rd Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL 2019), Osaka, Japan.
                             1. Collect random                            2. Train context-conditioned VAE
                             interaction samples


                        -                                        -


                             {τ1 , τ2 , . . . , τN }

                  ??
   3. RL training: learn policy π(z̄t , z̄g ) to mini-           4. Test time: agent executes policy to reach
   mize latent distance to generated goal zg                     human-provided goal image sg

      s0                                 sH        d(z̄g )           s0                           sH         sg

                                                             -



        Real-world Pusher Training Rollouts                               Test Rollouts (Unseen Objects)

Figure 1: System overview of our self-supervised learning algorithm. (1) The agent collects random interac-
tion data, to be used for both representation learning and as additional off-policy data for RL. (2) We propose
a context-conditioned generative model (CC-VAE) to learn generalizable skills. In order to improve the gen-
eration of plausible goal states that result from a starting state s0 , our model allows information to flow freely
through the context zc while an information bottleneck on zt gives us the ability to generate samples by re-
sampling only zt . This architecture provides a compact representation of the scene disentangling information
that changes within a rollout (zt ) and information that changes between rollouts (zc ). We then use z̄t = (zt , zc )
as the representation for RL. (3) Our proposed CC-RIG algorithm samples latent goals, using the above repre-
sentation, and learns a policy to minimize the latent distance to the goal with off-policy RL. Rollouts are shown
on the real-world Sawyer robot pusher environment with visual variation. We include the initial image s0 ,
selected frames from the rollout, final image sH , and the decoded goal latent d(z̄g ). (4) At test time, the agent
is given a goal image sg and executes the policy to reach it. Our method successfully handles pushing novel
objects that were unseen at training time. Example rollouts can be found at https://ccrig.github.io/



can learn to pick up or grasp it, and when it is presented with a door, it can learn to open it. However,
it must generate and practice goals that are suitable for each scene. In this paper, we propose and
evaluate a self-supervised policy learning method that learns to propose goals that are suitable to the
current scene via a conditional goal generation model, allowing it to learn in visually varied settings
that prove challenging for prior algorithms.
The key idea in our work is that representing every element in a visually complex scene is often
not necessary for control. A scene is a visual form of context that can be factored out, while only
the controllable entities in the environment need to be captured for goal setting and representing
the state. To this end, we propose learning a context-conditioned generative model that learns a
smooth, compressed latent variable with an information bottleneck, while allowing the context, in
the form of the initial state image, to be used freely to reconstruct other images during the task. This
context-conditioned generative model architecture is shown in Figure 1.
The main contribution in this paper builds on this context-conditioned generative model to devise
a complete self-supervised goal-conditioned reinforcement learning algorithm, which can handle
visual variability in the scene via context-conditioned goal setting. Our method can learn policies
that reach visually indicated goals without any additional supervision during training, using the
context-conditioned generative model to set goals that are appropriate to the current scene. We
show that our approach learns coherent representations of visually varied environments, capturing
controllable dimensions of variation while ignoring dimensions that vary but cannot be influenced
by the agent, such as lighting and object appearance. We further show that our approach can learn
policies to solve tasks in visually varied environments, including in a real-world robotic pushing
task with a wide variety of distinct objects in Figure 4.


                                                             2
2     Related Work
While many practical robots today perform tasks by executing hand-engineered sequences of motor
commands, machine learning is opening up a new avenue to train a wide variety of robotic tasks
from interaction. This body of work includes grasping [5, 6, 7], and general tasks [8, 9], multi-task
learning [10], baseball [11], ping-pong [12], and various other tasks [13]. More recently, using ex-
pressive function approximators such as neural networks has reduced manual feature engineering
and has increased task complexity and diversity, finding use in decision-making domains, such as
solving Atari games [14] and Go [15]. Deep learning for robotics has proved to be difficult due
to a host of challenges including noisy state estimation, specifying reward functions, and handling
continuous action spaces, but has been used to investigate grasping [16], pushing [17], manipula-
tion of 3D object models [18], active learning [19] and pouring liquids [20]. Deep reinforcement
learning, which autonomously maximizes a given reward function, has been used to solve precise
manipulation tasks [21], grasping [22, 23], door opening [24], and navigation [25]. These methods
have succeeded on specific tasks, often with hard-coded reward functions. However, to scale task
generalization robots may need to learn methods that can handle significant environment variation
and require relatively little external supervision.
Several works have investigated self-supervised robotic interaction with varied objects in the deep
learning setting with the goal of generalizing between objects. For example, in the domain of robotic
grasping, several works have studied autonomous data collection to learn to grasp from a hand-
specified grasping reward [16, 23]. However, hand-specifying such rewards in general settings and
for arbitrary manipulation skills is very cumbersome. Other work has focused on self-supervised
learning with visual forward models, either by enforcing a simplified dynamical structure [26, 27] or
with pixel transformer architectures [28, 29, 30, 31, 32]. However, these methods rely on accurate
visual forward modelling, which is itself a very challenging problem. Instead, we build on self-
supervised model-free approaches, which allow the agent to efficiently reach visual goals without
planning with a visual forward model.
Prior work has also sought to perform self-supervised learning with model-free approaches. Using
visual inverse models [17] is one such approach, but may not work well for complex interaction
dynamics or longer horizon planning. Most closely related to our approach are prior methods on
goal-conditioned reinforcement learning [33, 34, 35]. The methods have been extended to frame
self-supervised RL as learning goal reaching with automatically proposed goals, including visually-
specified goals [1, 4, 3, 36, 37]. However, they generally focus on learning in narrow environments
with little between-trial variability. In this setting, any previously visited state represents a valid
goal. However, in the general case, this is no longer true: when the robot is presented with a different
scene or different objects on each trial, it must only set those goals that can be accomplished in the
current scene. In contrast, we focus on enabling self-supervised learning from off-policy data in
heterogeneous environments with increased factors of variability.

3     Background
In this section, we provide an overview of relevant prior work necessary to understand our method,
including goal-conditioned reinforcement learning and representation learning with variational auto-
encoders.

3.1   Goal-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning

In an MDP consisting of states st ∈ S, actions at ∈ A, dynamics p(st+1 |st , at ), rewards rt , horizon
H, and discount factor γ, reinforcement learning addresses optimizing a policy at = πθ (st ) to max-
                        PH
imize expected return E[ t=0 γ t rt ]. To learn a variety of skills, it is instead convenient to optimize
over a family of reward functions parametrized by goals, as in the framework of goal-conditioned
RL [33]. A variety of RL algorithms exist, but as we are primarily interested in sample-efficient off-
policy learning, we consider goal-conditioned Q-learning algorithms [34]. These algorithms learn a
parametrized Q-function Qw (s, a, g) that estimates the expected return of taking action a from state
s with goal g. Q-learning methods rely on minimizing the Bellman error:
                            L = |Qw (s, a, g) − (r + max
                                                      0
                                                         Qw (s0 , a0 , g))|                          (1)
                                                         a



                                                   3
This objective can be optimized using standard actor-critic algorithms using a set of transitions
(s, a, s0 , g, r) which can be collected off-policy [38]. In practice, a target network is often used for
the second Q-function.

3.2   Variational Auto-Encoders

Above, the goal description can take many forms. To handle high-dimensional goals, in this work,
we learn a latent representation of the state using a variational auto-encoder (VAE). A VAE is a
probabilistic generative model that has been shown to learn structured representations of high-
dimensional data [39] successfully. It is trained by reconstructing states s with a parametrized
encoder that converts the state into a normal random distribution qφ (z|s) with a parametrized de-
coder that converts the latent variable z into a predicted state distribution pψ (s|z), while keeping
the latent z close (in KL divergence) to its prior p(z), a standard normal distribution. To train the
encoder and decoder parameters φ and ψ, we jointly optimize both objectives when minimizing the
negative evidence lower bound:
                      LVAE = −Eqφ (z|s) [log p(s|z)] + βDKL (qφ (z|s)||p(z)).                        (2)

3.3   Conditional Variational Auto-Encoders

Instead of a generative model that learns to generate the dataset distribution, one might instead
desire a more structured generative model that can generate samples based on structured input. One
example of this is a conditional variational auto-encoder (CVAE) that conditions the output on some
input variable c and samples from p(x|c) [40]. For example, to train a model that generates images
of digits given the desired digit, the input variable c might be a one-hot encoded vector of the desired
digit.
A CVAE trains qφ (z|s, c) and qψ (s|z, c), where both the encoder and decoder has access to the input
variable c. The CVAE then minimizes:
                   LCVAE = −Eqφ (z|s,c) [log p(s|z, c)] + βDKL (qφ (z|s, c)||p(z)).                  (3)
Samples are generated by first sampling a latent z ∼ p(z). Based on c, we can then decode z with
qψ (s|z, c) and visualize the output, which is in our case an image. In our framework c = s0 .

3.4   Reinforcement Learning with Imagined Goals

To learn skills from raw observations in a self-supervised manner, reinforcement learning with imag-
ined goals (RIG) proposed to use representation learning combined with goal-conditioned RL [1].
The aim of RIG is to choose actions in order to make the state st reach a goal image sg at test time.
RIG first collects an interaction dataset {st } and learns a latent representation by training a VAE on
this data. Then, a goal-conditioned policy is trained to act in the environment in order to reach a
given goal zg . Exploration data is collected by rolling out the policy with goals that are “imagined”
from the VAE prior; at test time, the policy can take in a goal image as input, encode the image to
the latent space, and act to reach the goal latent. A key limitation of this method is that sampling
goals from the VAE prior during training time assumes that every state in the dataset is reachable at
any time. However, in general, this assumption may not be true.

4     Self-Supervised Learning with Context-Conditioned Representations
In this work, our goal is to enable the learning of flexible goal-conditioned policies that can be used
to successfully perform a variety of tasks in a variety of contexts – e.g., with different objects in the
scene. Such policies must learn from large amounts of experience, and although it is in principle
possible to use random exploration to collect this experience, this quickly becomes impractical in
the real world. It is, therefore, necessary for the robot to set its own goals during self-supervised
training, to collect meaningful experience. However, in diverse settings, many randomly generated
goals may not be feasible – e.g., the robot cannot push a red puck if the red puck is not present in the
scene. We propose to extend off-policy goal-conditioned reinforcement learning with a conditional
goal setting model, which proposes only those goals that are currently feasible. This enables a
learning regime with imagined goals that is more realistic for real-world robotic systems that must
generalize effectively to a range of objects and settings.


                                                   4
4.1   Context-Conditioned VAEs

To train a generative model that can improve the generation of feasible goals in varied scenes, we use
a modified CVAE that uses the initial state s0 in a rollout as the input c, which we call the “context”
for that rollout. The modified CVAE, which we call a context-conditioned VAE (CC-VAE), is shown
in Figure 1. While most CVAE applications use a one-hot vector as the input, we use an image s0 .
This image is encoded with a convolutional encoder e0 into a compact representation zc . Note
that by design, e and e0 do not share weights, as they are intended to encode different factors of
variation in the images. The context zc is used to output the latent representation zt , as well as the
reconstruction of the state ŝt . In addition, zc is used alone to (deterministically) decode ŝ0 = d0 (zc ).
The objective is given by
                                    LCC-VAE = LCVAE + log p(s0 |zc ).                                             (4)
Due to the information bottleneck on zt , this loss function penalizes information passing through zt
but allows for unrestricted information flow from zc . Therefore, the optimal solution would encode
as much information as possible in zc , while only including the state information that changes within
a trajectory in the latent variable zt . These are precisely the features of most interest for control.

4.2   Context-Conditioned Reinforcement Learning with Imagined Goals

We propose to use our context-conditioned             Algorithm 1 Context-Conditioned RIG
VAE in the RIG framework to learn policies
over environments with visual diversity, where        Require: Encoders µ(st , s0 ),                e0 (s0 ),   policy
each episode might involve interacting with a             πθ (z̄, z¯g ), goal-conditioned value function
different scene and different objects. We first           Qw (z̄, z¯g ), dataset D = {τ (i) } of trajectories.
                                                       1: Train CC-VAE on D by optimizing (4).
collect a dataset of trajectories D = {τ (i) } by      2: for n = 0, ..., N − 1 episodes do
executing random actions in the environment.           3:   Sample latent goal zg ∼ p(z), z̄g = (zg , zc ).
We then learn a CC-VAE, as detailed in Sec-            4: Sample initial state s0 ∼ p(s0 ).
tion 4.1, to learn a factored representation of        5: Encode zc = e0 (s0 )
the image observations. To use the CC-VAE              6: for t = 0, ..., H − 1 steps do
for self-supervised learning, we save the first        7:       Observe st and encode z̄t = (µ(st , s0 ), zc )
image s0 when starting a rollout. We compute           8:       Get action at = πθ (z̄t , z̄g ) + noise.
the encoding of s0 , zc = e0 (s0 ). Let z̄ denote      9:       Get next state st+1 ∼ p(· | st , at ).
the context concatenated vector (z, zc ), and let     10:       Store (z̄t , at , z̄t+1 , z̄g ) into replay buffer R.
µ(s, s0 ) denote the mean of qφ (z|s, s0 ). We        11:       Sample transition (z̄, a, z̄ 0 , z̄g ) ∼ R.
                                                      12:       Compute new reward r = −||z̄ 0 − z̄g ||.
then use RIG in the z̄ latent space by encod-         13:       Minimize (1) using (z̄, a, z̄ 0 , z̄g , r).
ing observations with µ, meaning that we train        14: end for
a goal-conditioned policy π(z̄, z¯g ) and a goal-     15: end for
conditioned Q-function Q(z̄, z¯g ).
To collect data, we sample a latent goal for each rollout from the prior zg ∼ N (0, I), as in RIG.
For every observation st , we compute the mean encoding µt (st , s0 ). We then obtain a rollout of the
policy by executing π(z̄, z¯g ). The reward at each timestep is the latent distance ||µ̄t − z̄g ||.
The policy and Q-function can be trained with any off-policy reinforcement learning algorithm.
We use TD3 in our implementation [41]. Our policy and Q-function are goal-conditioned, and we
take advantage of being able to relabel the goals for each transition to improve sample efficiency
[35, 1, 4]. However, when relabeling a goal z̄g with a random goal from the environment, the
context-conditioning is still preserved. That is, if zg0 ∼ N (0, 1) is the new sampled goal, we use
z̄g0 = (zg0 , zc ). This ensures that the relabeled goal is compatible with the scene for the corresponding
transition.
After training, we can use the learned policy π to reach a visually indicated goal. Given a goal image
sg , we encode it into a latent goal zg = µ(sg , s0 ). Then, we execute the policy with the latent goal
z̄g , just as during the training phase. The complete algorithm is presented in Algorithm 1.


5     Experiments

In our experiments, we aim to answer the following questions:


                                                     5
                               Multi-color Pusher Learning Curve                              Multi-color 2D Navigation Learning Curve
                   0.25                                                                 5




                                                                     Final Distance to Goal
Final Distance to Goal
                                                                                                                             CC-RIG
                                                                                        4                                    RIG
                   0.20                                                                 3                                    Oracle

                                                                                        2
                   0.15
                                                                                        1
                         0K      200K     400K     600K    800K                               0K    100K    200K    300K   400K       500K
                                            Timesteps                                                         Timesteps
     Figure 2: Self-supervised learning results in visually varied simulated environments. CC-RIG significantly
     outperforms RIG and is competitive with the oracle method that has direct access to ground truth states.

                          1. How does our method compare to prior work at learning self-supervised skills in visually
                             diverse environments?
                          2. Do context-conditioned VAEs learn an image representation that produces coherent and
                             diverse goals that are suitable for the current scene?
                          3. Can our proposed context-conditioned RIG method handle diverse real-world data and
                             learn effective policies under visual variation in the real world?

     5.1                  Self-Supervised Learning in Simulation

     In simulation, we can conduct controlled experiments and evaluate against known underlying state
     values to measure the performance of our approach and prior methods. As a simulation test-bed,
     we use a multi-color pusher environment simulated in MuJoCo [42]. In this environment (Fig-
     ure 3(left)), a simulated Sawyer arm is tasked with pushing a circular puck to a target position,
     specified by a goal image at test time. On each rollout, the puck color is set to a random RGB value.
     Therefore, the goal proposals for each method must adequately account for the color of the puck – a
     goal that requires moving a red puck to a given location is impossible if only a blue puck is present
     in the scene.
     We compare the following algorithms: CC-RIG. Our method using a CC-VAE for representation
     learning, as described in Section 4.2. RIG. Reinforcement learning with imagined goals [1] using
     a standard VAE, as described in Section 3.4. Oracle. The oracle agent runs goal-conditioned RL
     with direct access to state information. Achieving performance similar to the oracle indicates that
     an algorithm loses little from using raw image observations over ground truth state.
     Learning curves comparing these methods are presented in the plot on the left in Figure 2. CC-RIG
     outperforms RIG significantly, and standard RIG is not able to improve beyond the initial random
     policy. The performance of CC-RIG approaches that of the oracle policy, which has access to the
     true state. This suggests that, in visually varied environments, self-supervised learning is possible
     so long as the visual complexity is factored out with representation learning, and the proposed goals
     are consistent with the appearance of the current scene.

     5.2                  Generalizing to Varying Appearance and Dynamics with Self-Supervised Learning

     In this experiment, to study changing both visual appearance and physical dynamics, we study how
     well our method can generalize when the environment dynamics change. We use a simulated 2D
     navigation task, where the goal is to navigate a point robot around an obstacle. The arrangement of
     the obstacles is chosen from a set of 15 possible configurations, and the color of the circle indicating
     the position of the point robot is generated from a random RGB value. Learning curves obtained by
     training the different methods above in this environment are presented in Figure 2. CC-RIG requires
     more samples to learn, but eventually approaches the oracle performance. RIG, in comparison,
     plateaus with poor performance in comparison.

     5.3                  Context-Conditioned VAE Goal Sampling

     To better understand why CC-RIG outperforms RIG, we compare the samples from our CC-VAE to a
     standard VAE. Samples from both models are shown in Figure 3. The quality of the samples reveals
     why the CC-VAE provides better goal setting for self-supervised learning. In all environments, the


                                                                    6
  Context s0




CVAE samples




 VAE samples

Figure 3: Comparing samples from our CC-VAE model to a standard VAE. The initial image s0 is shown on
the top row, and samples conditioned on s0 are shown below. Our model coherently maintains object color
and geometry in its samples, suggesting that the context conditioned model can successfully factor out the
scene-specific object identity from the variable object position. This enables the use of the CC-VAE for goal
proposals in visually diverse scenes.

samples from the CC-VAE maintain the background, object shape, and object color from the initial
state. Therefore, the goals are more meaningful in the CC-VAE latent space.
This kind of visualization is a good indicator for the suitability of the representation for self-
supervised learning. Diverse, coherent samples indicate that the latent space captures the appro-
priate factors of change in the environment and can be useful for self-supervised policy learning.
Good samples also suggest that the latent space is well-structured, and therefore distances in the
latent space should provide a good reward function for goal-reaching. In practice, we also look
at the quality of the reconstructions. Good reconstructions confirm that the latent variables capture
sufficient information about the image to be used in place of the image itself as a state representation.


5.4   Real-World Robotic Evaluation

In this experiment, we evaluate whether our method can handle manipulating visually varied objects
in the real world. To this end, we used CC-RIG to train a Sawyer robot to manipulate a variety
of objects, placed one at a time in a bin in front of the robot. As before, the training phase is
self-supervised, and the robot must match a given goal image at test time.
We first collect a large dataset with random actions and train a CC-VAE on the data. Samples from
the model are shown in Figure 4. The CC-VAE learns to generate goals with the correct object. To
handle varying brightness at different times of the day, we added data augmentation by applying a
color jitter filter to (s0 , st ) pairs. As seen in the figure, the model is robust to this factor of variation.
Each sample contains the same type of object, brightness level, and background as the initial state
that it is conditioned on. However, crucially, these factors of variation are not present in zt , as
evidenced by the fact they do not vary within each column of Figure 4, but the object position does.
Next, we run CC-RIG with the trained CC-VAE to learn to reach visually indicated goals in a self-
supervised manner. We first conduct fully off-policy training using the same dataset as was used
to train the CC-VAE, and then collect a small amount of additional on-policy data to finetune the
policy, analogously to recent work on large-scale vision-based robotic reinforcement learning [43].
The robot learns to push objects to target locations, indicated by a goal image. The real-world results
are presented in Figure 4. Because it is difficult to automatically detect the positions of objects, we
show some representative rollout examples, and we compute several distance metrics between the
final state of a rollout and the goal: CVAE distance. CC-VAE latent space distance between final
image and goal. VAE distance. VAE latent space distance between final image and goal. Pixel
distance. We manually label the center of mass of the object in the final image and goal image,
and compute the distance between them. Object distance. We measure the distance between the
physical goal position of the object and the final position. In each metric, CC-RIG outperforms RIG.


                                                       7
                                       Real-World Pushing Results
                         CVAE distance         VAE distance        Pixel distance   Object distance (cm)
    RIG                    2.37 ± 0.97         2.41 ± 0.93         93.9 ± 41.7           17.1 ± 8.2
    CC-RIG                 1.66 ± 0.63         2.17 ± 0.88         56.8 ± 34.5           14.0 ± 6.9
    CC-RIG, novel          1.51 ± 0.71         1.91 ± 0.87         53.1 ± 24.9           11.5 ± 2.9
             Test rollouts, training objects                           Test rollouts, novel objects
        s0                             sH       sg            s0                               sH      sg




Figure 4: The table above shows the performance of our method in the real-world, evaluated with four different
evaluation metrics1 . CC-RIG outperforms RIG in each one, even when tested on novel objects that it has not
been trained on. Test rollouts of our method are shown on training objects on the left and unseen novel objects
on the right. Successful rollouts where the object is pushed to the goal location are shown in top row, and
failure modes are shown in the bottom row.



At training time, the dataset consists of interaction with 20 objects. The result of running CC-RIG
on novel objects that were not included in the dataset are shown in the table as “CC-RIG, novel” and
in the rollouts in Figure 4. These results show that our method can also generalize its experience to
push novel objects it has not seen before.


6       Conclusion

We present a method for sample-efficient, flexible self-supervised task learning for environments
with visual diversity. Our method can learn effective behavior without external supervision in sim-
ulated environments with randomized colors and layout, and in a real-world pushing task with dif-
ferently colored pucks. Each environment contains an axis of visual variation that requires our
algorithm to utilize an intelligent goal-setting strategy, to ensure that the self-proposed goals are
consistent with the tasks and feasible in the current scene.
The main idea behind our method is to devise a context-conditioned goal proposal mechanism,
allowing our self-supervised reinforcement learning algorithm to propose goals for itself that are
feasible to reach. This context-conditioned VAE model factors out the unchanging context of a
rollout, such as which objects are present in the scene, from the controllable aspects, such as the
object positions to construct a more generalizable goal proposal model.
We believe this contribution will enable scalable learning in the real world. An agent manipulating
objects in the real world must handle many forms of variation: different manipulation skills to
learn, objects to manipulate, as well as variation in lighting, textures, etc. Methods that learn from
data must be able to represent these variations while at the same time taking advantage of common
structure across objects and tasks in order to achieve practical sample efficiency. Future work will
address the remaining challenges to achieve this vision. This includes minimizing repeated human
supervision even further by allowing reset-free data collection.

Acknowledgments

This research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under IIS-1651843, IIS-
1700697, and IIS-1700696, the Office of Naval Research, ARL DCIST CRA W911NF-17-2-0181,
DARPA, Berkeley DeepDrive, Google, Amazon, and NVIDIA.

    1
     The first three metrics are computed on 40 trajectories per method, and we report mean ± standard devia-
tion. Object distance is computed on 10 trajectories per method, and we report median ± standard deviation.


                                                      8
References
 [1] A. Nair, V. Pong, M. Dalal, S. Bahl, S. Lin, and S. Levine, “Visual Reinforcement Learning with
     Imagined Goals,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.

 [2] O. Nachum, G. Brain, S. Gu, H. Lee, and S. Levine, “Data-Efficient Hierarchical Reinforcement
     Learning,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.

 [3] D. Warde-Farley, T. Van De Wiele, T. Kulkarni, C. Ionescu, S. Hansen, &. Volodymyr, and M. Deepmind,
     “Unsupervised Control Through Non-Parametric Discriminative Rewards,” in International Conference
     on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2019.

 [4] V. H. Pong, M. Dalal, S. Lin, A. Nair, S. Bahl, and S. Levine, “Skew-fit: State-covering self-supervised
     reinforcement learning,” CoRR, vol. abs/1903.03698, 2019.

 [5] S. Ekvall and D. Kragic, “Interactive grasp learning based on human demonstration,” in IEEE Interna-
     tional Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2004. Proceedings. ICRA’04. 2004, vol. 4. IEEE, 2004,
     pp. 3519–3524.

 [6] O. Kroemer, R. Detry, J. Piater, and J. Peters, “Combining Active Learning and Reactive Control for
     Robot Grasping,” Robotics and Autonomous systems, vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 1105–1116, 2010.

 [7] J. Bohg and D. Kragic, “Learning grasping points with shape context,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems,
     vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 362–377, 2010.

 [8] J. Peters and S. Schaal, “Reinforcement learning of motor skills with policy gradients,” Neural Networks,
     vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 682 – 697, 2008, robotics and Neuroscience.

 [9] J. Kober, J. A. Bagnell, and J. Peters, “Reinforcement learning in robotics: A survey,” The International
     Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1238–1274, 2013.

[10] M. P. Deisenroth, P. Englert, J. Peters, and D. Fox, “Multi-task policy search for robotics,” in 2014 IEEE
     International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), May 2014, pp. 3876–3881.

[11] J. Peters and S. Schaal, “Reinforcement learning of motor skills with policy gradients,” Neural Networks,
     vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 682–697, 2008.

[12] J. Peters, K. Mülling, and Y. Altün, “Relative Entropy Policy Search,” in AAAI Conference on Artificial
     Intelligence, 2010, pp. 1607–1612.

[13] M. P. Deisenroth and C. E. Rasmussen, “PILCO: A model-based and data-efficient approach to policy
     search,” in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2011, pp. 465–472.

[14] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou, D. Wierstra, and M. Riedmiller, “Playing
     Atari with Deep Reinforcement Learning,” in NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning, 2013, pp. 1–9.

[15] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison et al., “Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and
     tree search,” Nature, vol. 529, no. 7587, pp. 484–489, jan 2016.

[16] L. Pinto and A. Gupta, “Supersizing Self-supervision: Learning to Grasp from 50K Tries and 700 Robot
     Hours,” IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2016.

[17] P. Agrawal, A. Nair, P. Abbeel, J. Malik, and S. Levine, “Learning to Poke by Poking: Experiential
     Learning of Intuitive Physics,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2016.

[18] M. Krainin, B. Curless, and D. Fox, “Autonomous generation of complete 3d object models using next
     best view manipulation planning,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation.
     IEEE, 2011, pp. 5031–5037.

[19] D. Martinez, G. Alenya, P. Jimenez, C. Torras, J. Rossmann, N. Wantia, E. E. Aksoy, S. Haller, and J. Pi-
     ater, “Active learning of manipulation sequences,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
     and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2014, pp. 5671–5678.

[20] C. Schenck and D. Fox, “Visual closed-loop control for pouring liquids,” in 2017 IEEE International
     Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2017, pp. 2629–2636.

[21] S. Levine, C. Finn, T. Darrell, and P. Abbeel, “End-to-End Training of Deep Visuomotor Policies,”
     Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 1334–1373, 2016.


                                                      9
[22] L. Pinto, J. Davidson, R. Sukthankar, and A. Gupta, “Robust Adversarial Reinforcement Learning,” in
     International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2017.
[23] S. Levine, P. Pastor, A. Krizhevsky, and D. Quillen, “Learning Hand-Eye Coordination for Robotic Grasp-
     ing with Deep Learning and Large-Scale Data Collection,” International Journal of Robotics Research,
     2017.
[24] S. Gu, T. Lillicrap, I. Sutskever, and S. Levine, “Continuous Deep Q-Learning with Model-based
     Acceleration,” in International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2016.
[25] G. Kahn, A. Villaflor, B. Ding, P. Abbeel, S. Levine, and B. A. Research, “Self-supervised Deep
     Reinforcement Learning with Generalized Computation Graphs for Robot Navigation,” in International
     Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2018.
[26] M. Watter, J. T. Springenberg, J. Boedecker, and M. Riedmiller, “Embed to Control: A Locally Linear
     Latent Dynamics Model for Control from Raw Images,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing
     Systems (NIPS), 2015, pp. 2728–2736.
[27] M. Zhang, S. Vikram, L. Smith, P. Abbeel, M. J. Johnson, and S. Levine, “SOLAR: Deep Structured
     Representations for Model-Based Reinforcement Learning,” in International Conference on Machine
     Learning (ICML), aug 2019.
[28] C. Finn and S. Levine, “Deep Visual Foresight for Planning Robot Motion,” in Advances in Neural
     Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2016.
[29] F. Ebert, C. Finn, A. X. Lee, and S. Levine, “Self-Supervised Visual Planning with Temporal Skip
     Connections,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2017.
[30] F. Ebert, S. Dasari, A. X. Lee, S. Levine, and C. Finn, “Robustness via Retrying: Closed-Loop Robotic
     Manipulation with Self-Supervised Learning,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), 2018.
[31] A. X. Lee, R. Zhang, F. Ebert, P. Abbeel, C. Finn, and S. Levine, “Stochastic Adversarial Video
     Prediction,” 2018.
[32] F. Ebert, C. Finn, S. Dasari, A. Xie, A. Lee, and S. Levine, “Visual Foresight: Model-Based Deep
     Reinforcement Learning for Vision-Based Robotic Control.”
[33] L. P. Kaelbling, “Learning to achieve goals,” in International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
     (IJCAI), vol. vol.2, 1993, pp. 1094 – 8.
[34] T. Schaul, D. Horgan, K. Gregor, and D. Silver, “Universal Value Function Approximators,” in
     International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2015, pp. 1312–1320.
[35] M. Andrychowicz, F. Wolski, A. Ray, J. Schneider, R. Fong, P. Welinder, B. Mcgrew, J. Tobin, P. Abbeel,
     and W. Zaremba, “Hindsight Experience Replay,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
     (NIPS), 2017.
[36] C. Florensa, J. Degrave, N. Heess, J. T. Springenberg, and M. Riedmiller, “Self-supervised learning of
     image embedding for continuous control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1901.00943, 2019.
[37] X. Lin, H. Singh Baweja, and D. Held, “Reinforcement Learning without Ground-Truth State,” arXiv
     preprint arXiv:1905.07866, 2019.
[38] T. P. Lillicrap, J. J. Hunt, A. Pritzel, N. Heess, T. Erez, Y. Tassa, D. Silver, and D. Wierstra, “Continuous
     control with deep reinforcement learning,” in International Conference on Learning Representations
     (ICLR), 2016.
[39] D. P. Kingma and M. Welling, “Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes,” in International Conference on
     Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.
[40] K. Sohn, X. Yan, and H. Lee, “Learning Structured Output Representation using Deep Conditional
     Generative Models,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2015.
[41] S. Fujimoto, H. van Hoof, and D. Meger, “Addressing Function Approximation Error in Actor-Critic
     Methods,” International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML), 2018.
[42] E. Todorov, T. Erez, and Y. Tassa, “MuJoCo: A physics engine for model-based control,” in IEEE/RSJ
     International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012, pp. 5026–5033.
[43] D. Kalashnikov, A. Irpan, P. Pastor et al., “Scalable deep reinforcement learning for vision-based robotic
     manipulation,” in Proceedings of The 2nd Conference on Robot Learning, ser. Proceedings of Machine
     Learning Research, vol. 87. PMLR, 29–31 Oct 2018, pp. 651–673.


                                                       10
